README.md, before:

# DiSMEC++
[![Testing](https://github.com/xmc-aalto/dismecpp/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/xmc-aalto/dismecpp/actions/workflows/test.yml)

A software package for large-scale linear multilabel classification. `DiSMEC++` is a new implementation
of the [`DiSMEC`](https://github.com/xmc-aalto/dismec) [[2]](#2) algorithm that is better adapted many-core CPUs found in modern cluster environments by 
taking into account the NUMA setup of these systems, and provides a variety of additional features over 
the original implementation. Some highlights are:
* New weight initialization algorithms for faster training [[3]](#3)
* Ability to read data from and store models as `npy` files
* Ability to handle dense input features
* Additional loss functions and regularizers


## Building
The code can be build with cmake:
```shell script
mkdir build
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DBUILD_DEVEL_DOCS=Off -S . -B ./build
cmake --build build --parallel
```
The resulting executables and python library will be placed in `./build/bin`
and `./build/lib` respectively. 

**Attention** Note that dependencies of the code are included in the `deps` directory as
git submodules. Please ensure that these are properly initialized before building, e.g., by
`clone`ing the repository with the `--recurive` argument.

Building requires at least GCC8, and we expect [Boost](https://www.boost.org/) to be available on the system.

## Usage
To train a model, the `train` program can be used, new predictions can be made
using the `predict` executable. Calling these programs with `--help` as argument
will display the list of command-line arguments with a short description.

### Example
Suppose you want to train a model for the <cite>Eurlex-4k</cite> [[1]](#1) dataset. 
You can download the data from the 
[extreme classification repository](http://manikvarma.org/downloads/XC/XMLRepository.html).
The two files `eurlex_train.txt` and `eurlex_test.txt` are assumed to be in the same directory
as the executables, otherwise you need to adjust the paths. You can also use the files included
in the `test` directory in this repository.

A typical training call would look like this:
```shell
./train train_eurlex.txt eurlex.model --augment-for-bias --normalize-instances --save-sparse-txt --weight-culling=0.01
```
The first positional argument specifies the source for the training data, `train_eurlex.txt`
and the second argument the destination for the result, `eurlex.model`. Note that models are
distributed over several files, with `eurlex.model` serving as an index file, and the actual
weights saved in files that match `eurlex.models.weights*`.

The next two arguments specify the preprocessing to be applied to the data: 
`--augment-for-bias` adds a feature column of ones that serve as a bias term, and
`--normalize-instances` normalizes the features of each instance to have Euclidean
norm of 1, which usually improves the results. 

The last two arguments specify the saving of the model. The `--save-sparse-txt` indicates
that model weights are saved as human-readable text files of sparse matrices in a `index:value` 
format. To ensure model sparsity, `--weight-culling=0.01` removes all weights with a magnitude
of less than `0.01` from the saved model.

To test the model, you can run
```shell
./predict test_eurlex.txt eurlex.model eurlex_pred.txt --augment-for-bias --normalize-instances --topk=5
```
Note that the same preprocessing arguments as for the training run need to be specified. This
call will determine the top-5 labels for all instances in the test set and write them to the
`eurlex_pred.txt` file. It will also print out a multitude of metrics that can be calculated
from these predictions. If you want to further process these metrics, it might be helpful to
have them in a format that is easier for scripting. This can be achieved using the argument
`--save-metrics=eurlex-metrics.json`, which will write the metrics to the given json file that
can be imported, e.g., into a python script.


## Documentation
If you have doxygen installed, then you can build the documentation 
using `cmake --build build --target doxygen` and will find the documentation
in `build/docs/html`. You can also browse the documentation [online](https://xmc-aalto.github.io/dismecpp/index.html).
If you want the documentation to include internals, you can configure cmake with `-DBUILD_DEVEL_DOCS=On`.

## Unit Tests
The unit tests can be built using the `unittest` cmake target:
```shell
cmake --build build --target unittest
```
Run the resulting executable `bin/unittest` to execute the tests and get a report.
In addition to unit tests, the github CI also runs the training program on eurlex [[1]](#1)
data and compares the resulting model with reference weights. As there is no unique, true solution
for the learning problem, a failure of this test does not necessarily mean that a code change is breaking things -- but
it indicates that the change should be given close attention and additional testing with other datasets, to ensure that
there are no regressions. To run these tests manually, use the `test/eurlex-test.py` script provided in this repository.

## Directories
### src
Contains the C++ code for the DiSMEC solver and the python bindings.

### deps
Contains sources/headers for libraries that we use as part of the implementation,
as git submodules. Currently, these are 
* https://github.com/CLIUtils/CLI11
* https://github.com/gabime/spdlog
* https://github.com/onqtam/doctest
* https://github.com/pybind/pybind11
* https://github.com/nlohmann/json
* https://gitlab.com/libeigen/eigen

## References
<a id="1">[1]</a>
E. L. Mencia and J. Furnkranz, Efficient pairwise multilabel classification for large-scale problems in the legal domain in ECML/PKDD, 2008. 

I. Chalkidis, E. Fergadiotis, P. Malakasiotis, N. Aletras and I. Androutsopoulos, 
"Extreme Multi-Label Legal Text Classification: A Case Study in EU Legislation", in Natural Legal Language Processing Workshop 2019.  

<a id="2">[2]</a>
Rohit Babbar and Bernhard Schölkopf. "Dismec: Distributed sparse machines for extreme multi-label classification." 
Proceedings of the tenth ACM international conference on web search and data mining. 2017.

<a id="3">[3]</a>
Erik Schultheis and Rohit Babbar. "Speeding-up One-vs-All Training for Extreme Classification via Smart Initialization." 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.13122 (2021).

Commit message:

verify compilation with -Werror on a wide range of compiler versions

README.md, after:

# DiSMEC++
[![Build](https://github.com/xmc-aalto/dismecpp/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/xmc-aalto/dismecpp/actions/workflows/build.yml)
[![Testing](https://github.com/xmc-aalto/dismecpp/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/xmc-aalto/dismecpp/actions/workflows/test.yml)

A software package for large-scale linear multilabel classification. `DiSMEC++` is a new implementation
of the [`DiSMEC`](https://github.com/xmc-aalto/dismec) [[2]](#2) algorithm that is better adapted many-core CPUs found in modern cluster environments by 
taking into account the NUMA setup of these systems, and provides a variety of additional features over 
the original implementation. Some highlights are:
* New weight initialization algorithms for faster training [[3]](#3)
* Ability to read data from and store models as `npy` files
* Ability to handle dense input features
* Additional loss functions and regularizers


## Building
The code can be build with cmake:
```shell script
mkdir build
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DBUILD_DEVEL_DOCS=Off -S . -B ./build
cmake --build build --parallel
```
The resulting executables and python library will be placed in `./build/bin`
and `./build/lib` respectively. 

**Attention** Note that dependencies of the code are included in the `deps` directory as
git submodules. Please ensure that these are properly initialized before building, e.g., by
`clone`ing the repository with the `--recurive` argument.

Building requires at least GCC8, and we expect [Boost](https://www.boost.org/) to be available on the system.

## Usage
To train a model, the `train` program can be used, new predictions can be made
using the `predict` executable. Calling these programs with `--help` as argument
will display the list of command-line arguments with a short description.

### Example
Suppose you want to train a model for the <cite>Eurlex-4k</cite> [[1]](#1) dataset. 
You can download the data from the 
[extreme classification repository](http://manikvarma.org/downloads/XC/XMLRepository.html).
The two files `eurlex_train.txt` and `eurlex_test.txt` are assumed to be in the same directory
as the executables, otherwise you need to adjust the paths. You can also use the files included
in the `test` directory in this repository.

A typical training call would look like this:
```shell
./train train_eurlex.txt eurlex.model --augment-for-bias --normalize-instances --save-sparse-txt --weight-culling=0.01
```
The first positional argument specifies the source for the training data, `train_eurlex.txt`
and the second argument the destination for the result, `eurlex.model`. Note that models are
distributed over several files, with `eurlex.model` serving as an index file, and the actual
weights saved in files that match `eurlex.models.weights*`.

The next two arguments specify the preprocessing to be applied to the data: 
`--augment-for-bias` adds a feature column of ones that serve as a bias term, and
`--normalize-instances` normalizes the features of each instance to have Euclidean
norm of 1, which usually improves the results. 

The last two arguments specify the saving of the model. The `--save-sparse-txt` indicates
that model weights are saved as human-readable text files of sparse matrices in a `index:value` 
format. To ensure model sparsity, `--weight-culling=0.01` removes all weights with a magnitude
of less than `0.01` from the saved model.

To test the model, you can run
```shell
./predict test_eurlex.txt eurlex.model eurlex_pred.txt --augment-for-bias --normalize-instances --topk=5
```
Note that the same preprocessing arguments as for the training run need to be specified. This
call will determine the top-5 labels for all instances in the test set and write them to the
`eurlex_pred.txt` file. It will also print out a multitude of metrics that can be calculated
from these predictions. If you want to further process these metrics, it might be helpful to
have them in a format that is easier for scripting. This can be achieved using the argument
`--save-metrics=eurlex-metrics.json`, which will write the metrics to the given json file that
can be imported, e.g., into a python script.


## Documentation
If you have doxygen installed, then you can build the documentation 
using `cmake --build build --target doxygen` and will find the documentation
in `build/docs/html`. You can also browse the documentation [online](https://xmc-aalto.github.io/dismecpp/index.html).
If you want the documentation to include internals, you can configure cmake with `-DBUILD_DEVEL_DOCS=On`.

## Unit Tests
The unit tests can be built using the `unittest` cmake target:
```shell
cmake --build build --target unittest
```
Run the resulting executable `bin/unittest` to execute the tests and get a report.
In addition to unit tests, the github CI also runs the training program on eurlex [[1]](#1)
data and compares the resulting model with reference weights. As there is no unique, true solution
for the learning problem, a failure of this test does not necessarily mean that a code change is breaking things -- but
it indicates that the change should be given close attention and additional testing with other datasets, to ensure that
there are no regressions. To run these tests manually, use the `test/eurlex-test.py` script provided in this repository.

The github CI tests ensure that, with selective warning suppression, the code can be compiled on gcc versions 8 to 12 
and clang 10 to 14 with `-Wall -Werror`. Building is tested on Ubuntu versions `18.04`, `20.04` and `22.04`, in both
`Debug` and `Release` configuration.
The current status of the builds (including unit tests) is 
[![Build](https://github.com/xmc-aalto/dismecpp/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/xmc-aalto/dismecpp/actions/workflows/build.yml).

## Directories
### src
Contains the C++ code for the DiSMEC solver and the python bindings.

### deps
Contains sources/headers for libraries that we use as part of the implementation,
as git submodules. Currently, these are 
* https://github.com/CLIUtils/CLI11
* https://github.com/gabime/spdlog
* https://github.com/onqtam/doctest
* https://github.com/pybind/pybind11
* https://github.com/nlohmann/json
* https://gitlab.com/libeigen/eigen

## References
<a id="1">[1]</a>
E. L. Mencia and J. Furnkranz, Efficient pairwise multilabel classification for large-scale problems in the legal domain in ECML/PKDD, 2008. 

I. Chalkidis, E. Fergadiotis, P. Malakasiotis, N. Aletras and I. Androutsopoulos, 
"Extreme Multi-Label Legal Text Classification: A Case Study in EU Legislation", in Natural Legal Language Processing Workshop 2019.  

<a id="2">[2]</a>
Rohit Babbar and Bernhard Schölkopf. "Dismec: Distributed sparse machines for extreme multi-label classification." 
Proceedings of the tenth ACM international conference on web search and data mining. 2017.

<a id="3">[3]</a>
Erik Schultheis and Rohit Babbar. "Speeding-up One-vs-All Training for Extreme Classification via Smart Initialization." 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.13122 (2021).
